\section{Performance notes}

Some notes on performance techniques:

\subsection{Whispering}

Whispers fall into two categories: inhaled and exhaled. When exhaling, the
performer should affect the consonant indicated (f-, sh-, etc.) and then simply
whisper it, as though starting to speak a word and halting suddenly. There
should be no pitch, no sustain, just variations of white noise as dictated by
the consonant expression. Inhaling is much the same: affect the given consonant
(h-, f-, etc.) and then audibly breathe in, creating lighter or darker
variations of white noise. If extra breathe is necessary, take it. In general,
one shouldn't need much air, as the effect of these whisperings are very quiet
in the ensemble texture.

\subsection{Pitch pipes}

When performing with circular pitch pipes, place enough of the instrument into
the mouth that four or more notes can be sounded at once. Breath liberally,
changing inhale to exhale as necessary. The effect should be a dense chromatic
chord. Don't try to match the chord of fellow performers. Ideally each
performer would be playing a slightly different chord, causing the harmony
drift as performers enter and exit.

\subsection{Wine glasses}

Wine glasses should be filled partially with water and performed by dipping one
finger into that water and then circling that same finger around the lip of the
glass, causing it to resonate. Each wine glass should be filled slightly
differently from each other wine glass, allowing the harmony to drift (like the
pitch pipes) as wine glass music enters and exits the ensemble texture.

\subsection{Guiros}

All tremoli, whether indicated or not, should be scrape tremoli. The scraping
should be very narrow - one or two inches wide - and without any obvious
inflections from direction changes.

\subsection{Pitched percussion}

All pitched percussion should be played with soft mallets if possible, except
when bowed. Exceptions are fine, though.
